The Dorian Principle, a biblical response to the commercialization of Christianity by
Conley Owens, Chapter 12, the Challenge of Parachurch, Help vs. Hurt.
Nothing makes for an exciting hero like a vigilante.
Fed up with the inefficiencies or corruptions of governing authorities, Azele's hero
goes outside the purview of the law to take matters of justice into his own hands.
He captures and punishes criminals unencumbered by red tape and crooked bureaucrats, fueled
by righteous indignation, he restores order in the world.
It's no wonder fictional characters like Robin Hodo and Batman, Garner Mass Appeal,
and reality, however, vigilante justice is often problematic, rarely guided by a careful
weighing of the matter, psychological instability or mob mentality typically provokes such activity.
Even those who do operate with some sense of rationality frequently commit grave errors
by baddening the safeguards as civil government.
There is a reason the phrase kangaroo court does not ring with positive connotations.
In a sense, the church has her own set of vigilantes.
When Jesus established God's heavenly kingdom on earth, he decided to operate through a franchise
of local institutions he called the church, Assemblies constituted with particular offices
and functions.
Many have found this structure inefficient, often to establish their own institutions to
accomplish religious ends, widely known as parachurch organizations.
Many of these ministries may be accompanied by the excitement of fictional vigilantes,
but they often encounter problems similar to the ones faced by real world vigilantes.
I don't write all this to challenge the legitimacy of parachurch ministries, but to call
attention to the fact that they introduce their own complications, especially when it comes
to ministry fundraising.
Since they cannot rely on the fundraising practice of the church, they tend to create new
avenues of support that potentially violate the Dory Imprinciple.
In this chapter, I would like to offer a quick overview of where exactly the issues lie
and how a healthy focus on the local church may circumvent them.
Church identity versus parachurch identity.
The church is that body of believers Christ instituted to represent his kingdom on earth.
The universal church is composed of all Christians everywhere, while the local church refers to
a particular society of Christians characterized by their regular gathering for worship.
Ethemologically, parah indicates coming alongside of something.
Parachurch ministry is simply any ministry regulated outside of the local church whose primary
goal is to ate the church with their local or universal.
Thus, while the label is typically used for organizations like Intervarsity Christian Fellowship
or Compassion International, broadly, it applies even to individuals operating outside the
structure of the local church with the intent to serve the church.
Church structure versus parachurch structure.
The essential distinction between the local church and the parachurch lies in structure.
Sending this distinction is the key to recognizing the potential pitfalls of parachurch entities,
especially as related to the Dorian Principle.
Let's look at this structure according to the Bible's breakdown of a church.
The congregation, elders, and deacons.
The congregation is the membership of a church.
While some churches do not practice formal membership, there is generally an understanding
of who is permitted to participate in the Lord's Supper on a regular basis.
The congregation ultimately forms the primary source of accountability in the church.
Even if the church does not practice congregational voting, the people vote with their feet, joining
and supporting those ministries which operate as they see fit.
Parachurch ministries rarely have similarly defined membership, or even similarly defined
goals.
The elders of a church watch over a congregation, managing the teaching of the church and leading
it into discerning doctrinal issues.
Ideally, a body of elders would consider church fundraising practices in light of the
word of God with especially discerning eyes.
Parachurch organizations typically guarantee no such oversight.
The deacons of a church have authority over the physical resources of the church to meet
the physical needs of the church.
The Bible requires they conform to the standard set in 1 Timothy 3, 8, through 13.
Outside the church, those who take on similar roles may be vetted spiritually, but are rarely
assessed by the same rubric.
In all these, secular positions replace sacred ones.
The structure that protects the ethical collection of resources in the church rarely exists in
other organizations, nor can it ever completely.
In adding such church structures, a parachurch organization would cease to exist as such, and
would simply become a church.
Church fundraising versus parachurch fundraising.
The Bible establishes a model of fundraising for the church, the voluntary contributions
of the congregation.
Presuming they are offered in an effort to co-labor with the church, they perfectly accord
with the Dorian Principle.
We see these contributions first in Acts, where the people pool their resources.
Acts 2, 44 to 345.
To be distributed by the apostles, functioning as elders.
Acts 4, 34 to 335.
And later, a body known as the Seventh, functioning as deacons.
Acts 6, 1 through 3.
Elsewhere, Paul commands the church in Corinth to contribute weekly on the first day of every
week.
In Acts 6, 1 through 2.
In contrast, the Bible prescribes no source of income for parachurch organizations.
Consequently, the exigencies of ministry drive them toward innovative fundraising practices,
frequently creating opportunities to transgress the Dorian Principle.
While not exclusive to parachurch institutions, there is a reason the sale of ministry occurs
more frequently outside the church than inside the church.
Book sales cover author commission, conference tickets cover speaker fees, tuition payments
cover tenured salaries, and proprietary licenses cover musician paychecks.
Yet by and large, the voluntary contributions of the congregation suffice for church-employed
ministers.
Alternative approaches.
Parachurch entities typically form for the sake of expediency.
The alternatives deemed too inefficient or ineffective.
However, in light of the Dorian Principle, we should consider several alternatives to
the practices of parachurch ministries.
Moving from more to less aggressive measures, the following three strategies provide potential
replacements for standard parachurch practices that abandon the Dorian Principle.
Conducting ministry under the auspices of the local church.
Many parachurch endeavors could directly translate to church endeavors.
Such ministry would be subject to the authority structure of the church and receive its funding
directly from the church.
The governance of a parachurch entity that seems too large or has too many stakeholders
to fit within a single church could potentially be subdivided or franchise to be run by multiple
churches.
Not only would this work for many sophisticated organizations, but it would work especially
well for ministries of individuals.
For pastors and other staff, churches could recognize their special labor in their regular
salary.
For others, nothing inhibits the church from creating a position for them.
For example, some churches have a scholar and residence position that could be appropriately
compensated.
Christian authors who produce valuable teaching ought to be supported so that they have
the liberty to write without fearing the financial ramifications of abandoning their day
job.
However, a number of Christian authors write and publish books independent of the authority
structure and financing of their church.
In the end, they frequently support their work by selling their finished product, some
even priding themselves for doing so.
To draw examples from the spectrum of evangelicalism, Rick Warren and Joel Osteen have both
opted out of taking any income from their churches instead living primarily on book royalties.
However, this swaps co-labor with reciprocity, reversing the Dorian principle.
They proudly reject co-labor and happily accept reciprocity.
The church that wishes to co-labor with the minister should be permitted to do so, and
none should be asked to purchase ministry through book sales or otherwise.
In contrast, some have commendably offered their works for free, rejecting royalties from
hard copy sales, living only on the support provided by their churches.
John Piper is an example of one such minister.
Fundraising through church partnerships.
Those paraturch organizations which receive their funding largely from individuals could limit
their solicitations to established churches.
By receiving money from churches that wished to partner with them, they would rely only
on the voluntary contribution of congregations rather than the sale of religious instruction.
Prefunding.
Rather than attempting to recoup costs after the fact via ticket and literature sales,
paraturch organizations could prefund their ministry.
For example, religious conference organizers could work with churches and individuals to
collect money to support the teachers rather than doing so through ticket sales.
Similarly, rather than relying on book sales, Christian publishing houses could work with
churches and individuals to establish joint fund from which authors would be paid.
Instead of one entity shouldering all the risk and potentially turning a financial profit,
many believers were partnered together in sharing the risk, praying together for a spiritual
harvest.
Crown funding utilities such as Kickstarter or Patreon offer a viable alternative to the
work first, receive later model of the publishing industry.
With these tools, one may receive funds from partners on a regular basis or raise money
for a ministry endeavor prior to commencing.
These approaches would give Christian ministers a way to raise support from those genuinely
interested in supporting the ministry without appealing directly to those who are the main
targets of the ministry.
However, a word of caution.
Crown funding utilities often encourage offering perks at different donation levels, and the
context of ministry, such seeming bribery does not accord with the Dorian principle.
Seminaries
As a case study, a particular category of parachurch organization supplies here.
Seminaries typically operate outside of the direct oversight of the local church, but
have significant impact on the church at large.
While financial aid programs exist, rarely does one complete a seminary degree apart from
incurring substantial costs.
As an example, reformed theological seminary presently charges tuition at typical rates.
At $585 per semester hour, for a 106 hour master of divinity degree, that totals to $62,010.
Not counting the additional host of fees that go beyond rural tuition.
Even that seminary education constitutes religious instruction in nearly the purest sense, the
Dorian principle demands that seminaries not accept money from their students in exchange.
However, rather than destroying these institutions, several options compatible with the Dorian principle
offer ways to preserve them.
Rather than raising money through tuition, seminaries could be funded by individuals and
churches looking to support the work of the school.
For example, such an institution does not have to directly salary their instructors, but
could instead provide a framework for churches to support them.
These issues of staff largely exhaust our concerns since the Dorian principle does not necessarily
regulate student room and board.
For brick and mortar seminaries, compliance with the biblical ethic may largely reside
in delineating facility costs from staff costs, ensuring the latter is funded through responsibly
sourced donations.
However, the advent of online seminaries offers a new way forward with little concern
for physical resources.
In fact, several of these seminaries have adopted a similar model, with virtually all faculty
receiving no compensation directly from the seminary.
For example, the law college and seminary and forged theological seminary both provide
free education through removing the financial burden of a physical campus, choosing educational
material that minimizes costs and relying on the support of volunteer faculty.
These individuals often receive support for their work from their own churches, who understand
their academic efforts to be an aspect of their ministry.
By structuring themselves this way, these institutions relegate spiritual formation and other time-intensive
aspects of seminary life to the local church.
While this trend represents a radical shift from the traditional model, it promotes the
primacy of the local church and, consequently, compliance with the Dorian principle.
As more seminaries follow this model, we may hope that a free education will become the
norm of pastoral training.
Conferences As an additional case study, gospel themed
conferences likewise collect large sums of money from attendees.
Non-uncommonly, organizers sell tickets at a cost approximating $100 a day.
For example, together for the Gospels T4G20 was a three-day exclusive livestream event
with registration costing $299.
At thousands in attendance, this represents over $1 million in ticket sales.
If the purpose of such events is truly to promote the gospel, then the Dorian principle must
shape its commerce.
Naturally, large events require substantial sums of money to reserve venues, print conference
materials, etc.
Thus, it is not surprising that fees are often associated with conference attendance.
However, according to our ethic, one should not charge for the actual ministry of the gospel.
A key issue here is that in conference tickets, material costs are rarely delineated from
the cost of the instruction itself.
When they are, it becomes apparent whether or not the organizers intend to sell religious
instruction to the audience.
For example, in order to avoid the suggestion that the teaching itself is being sold, a ticket
could be labeled a meal in facilities pass.
Regardless, our ethic also regulates all that directly attends to the proclamation of the
word.
So gospel-centric event organizers should consider finding willing co-laborers rather than
charging for attendance.
Conclusion
This paraturch ministry lacks the structure of the church.
It opens itself to additional opportunities to violate the Dorian principle.
Most notably, it lacks the regular contributions of the saints, and so frequently resorts
to creative fundraising measures.
These measures often cross the line set by the Dorian principle.
Recognizing the tacit dangers of paraturch ministry, we should respond proactively, finding
ways to generate support through co-labor rather than reciprocity.
Where possible, we should even consider restructuring paraturch activities under the auspices
of the church.
End of chapter 12